Conclusion
##########
.. 1


During my PhD I have investigated the mechanics of actin network as found in
cells. 

In the first part, the reconstitution of biomimetic cortices on polystyrene
beads allowed to see that from the thin cortex emanates actin filaments. We
determined that the mechanical effect of theses actin filament can be perceived
10 to 15 µm from the bead surface well beyond the surface of the reconstituted
actin cortex (~1µm). The actin cloud formed by these filament appear to be
mostly elastic at the time scale of tens of second, and have a elasticity a few
pascal, several order of magnitude smaller than the actin gel visible on the
surface of the beads. Nonetheless, this actin network appear to be able to
sustain forces sufficient to move organelles an seem coherent with several
observation make `in-vivo` in cells. 


We also studied the properties change of this actin cloud with biochemical
condition, and in particular with the concentration of Capping Protein.  Using
polymer physics, we are able to derive information about the structure of the
network, like mesh-size and filaments length. We show that the evolution of the
models parameter with the concentration of Capping protein are coherent with
previously observed phenomena: The distance offset :math:`\delta` in our model
correspond to the measured gels thickness by the position of the half
fluorescence maximum. 

Our description thus extend the current knowledge of reconstituted actin
cortices. It show that beyond a simple dens gels that form on membrane, is a
transition to soft structure with highlight different properties. These
properties have direct impact on the cells mechanics and could be directly
involved in the positioning of organelles in cells.


The mechanical properties of cells and of the actin cortex is not driven only
by the dynamics of actin polymerisation. The effect of molecular motors is
crucial to understand  the change in acto-myosin cortices tension. 

In the second part of my PhD I thus focused on the measurement of increase of
cortical tension. In order to address the question of evolution of cortical
tension with time, we developed a new biomimetic system. This system composed
of liposomes doublets allow by 3D imaging and the tracking of geometrical
parameter through time to measure the relative increase of the cortex tension
with a high time resolution. We also developed an automated methods to measure
the geometrical parameters of liposomes doublets to obtain accurate and robust
measurement of contact angle independent from experimenter bias.  This non
invasive measurement methods is a step toward the better understanding of the
effect of myosin motors on the cortical tension in cells, and its consequences
on cell motility.


The mechanic and dynamic of  actin network is decisive for cell fate. In the
case of mouse oocytes it is necessary for the correct positioning of different
structure of the cells like the mitotic spindle and the nucleus during the
meiosis. Without the network formed by actin, or its dynamism due to myosins,
the oocyte never achieve complete meiosis leading to non viable cells.

It is on such a system that is based the third part of my PhD. In a
collaboration with Collège de France, we used image analysis as a complementary
technique to determine the evolution of cytoplasmic activity. In particular we
looked at the measure of autocorrelation of bright field images of mouse
oocyte.  We investigated the change of autocorrelation characteristic decay
time with the alteration of protein expression in oocyte and showed that it was
strongly dependent on the presence of the actin network and its dynamism due to
myosin. The method developed also allow to determine the temporal and spatial
change in activity in mouse oocyte actin network. It thus provide a simple
methods that hints for change in network dynamics in live cell. This will allow
a better understanding of the different phenomenon at the origin of organelles 
positioning in cells and the role of actin networks.








