.. cytoskeleton

Cytoskeleton
************

The cytoskeleton, literally skeleton of the cell, is the structure which give
it shape to a cell.  As for other multicellular animals that possesses
skeleton, its shape is often a hint on how a organism move. As feet, fins and
wigs are characteristics that will tell you whether a animal does more
preferably prefer land, see or air, the cytoskeleton is will tell you many
things a bout a cell. 

In the other hand, unlike (exo)-Skeleton of animals which is ridged and
unchanging, the cytoskeleton of cell is a  highly dynamic structure that keep
remodeling itself on a short time scale compared to the speed at which a cell
move. That's through this dynamics that the cytoskeleton can achieve its
functions.  As mammals skeletons are necessary to transmit force from one part
of the body to another, the cell cytoskeleton is responsible to not only
transmit the force the cell is exerting, but also to generate theses force.
Thats through its cytoskeleton that a cell can be connected to its environment,
both mechanically and biochemically.

.. todo::
    trouver des ref pour ci dessous    

The cytoskeleton is mainly composed of three type of filaments.  The
microtubules, intermediate filament and actin filament, also known as
microfilament.

.. Microtubules

Microtubules are the wider with a diameter of 20nm and :cite:`un article où on
voit le diametre` the stiffer of the three kinds of filament with a persistence
length in the order of millimeter, which is much longer than the size of the
usual cell. Microtubules are extensively studied :cite:`cite some reviews ...`.
Microtubules form polar (oriented) filament that can be walked on by molecular
motors that can be decomposed in two families – kinesins  and dyneins –
depending on the end toward which the motor preferably walk. Microtubules are
mostly known for their action during the cells mitosis where they will form
majority of the mitotic spindle that drive the segregation of the chromosomes
in two groups, each group ending in one of the daughter cells. 

We will not be interested directly into the effect and behavior of microtubules in this manuscript. 


.. Intermediate filament

Intermediate filaments are of medium diameter in the order of around 10nm, in
between actin and microtubules filament, hence their name.  Unlike microtubules
and actin filament, intermediate filaments are composed by several sub-families
of proteins and are non-polar.

.. Actin

Actin, is the third component of the cytoskeleton, the one we will focus most of our effort.


  - cf fletcher 2010 review :cite:`Fletcher2010` the cytoskeleton as 3 main functions :

    - organize cell in space
    - connect cell to external environment (biochemical and mechanical) 
    - generate and coordinate force to allow cell to change shape.
    - some things on temporal and spacial effect of structures like "bud scar"
    - schema of branched Arp2/3 actin factor
  - Loading history determines the velocity of actin-network growth
    :cite:`Parekh2005` hence network can record history, single filament
    cannot.
  - more than 150 protein have been found to bind with actin.
  - Wave complex,

    - Wasp, N-Wasp ( need to cite `Machesky1999` )
  - Not composed only by actin

Should cite `Pollard2003`

    - Some network need actin, some other do not. (Fletcher review 2010)

    
    - NPF

    - Polymerase, (depolymerase severing), 

    - crosslinker, 

      - // like fascine

        - rotate like alpha-acitinnin

        - effect of cross linking distance :cite:`Morse20..`

    - stabilizing

    - Moleular motors.

    - interphase, cellule prepare for division

    - Mitosis : "DNA Segregating"


    - need to describe actin, 

      - depending on the length scale semi-flexible polymers.

    - polymerisation barbed end pointed end, (directed)

      - form microfilement

    - cytoskeleton is dynamic

    - formed under the plasme membrane
    - ratchet nechanisme

    - use of Arp2/3 to branch

    - capping, protein,  formin (OOcyte)

    - myosin, run on actin to barbed end/ processive/not processive.

      - stress fibres

    - troppomyosine

    - phaloidine


      
      
