.. role_of_actin

The Role Of Actin Cytoskeleton
******************************
.. 2


Cell Motility
=============
.. 3

The way cells moves highly depend on their environment and the type of cells.
We can distinguish several Strategy of movement, mainly categorised into
amoeboid and mesenchymal movement. The type of motility involve for certain
cell can be characteristic of malignant tissue, and play a significant role in
the ability of the cells to invade nearby tissues. 



understanding motility migh helpt to understand metastatis.

Description of cell motility : 
Often help through membrane protrusion rived by actin polymerisation

Figure filopodia pushing
Figure Bleb retracting


Lamelipodium based Motility
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. 4

We can ave a first look into the amoeboid mode of locomotion of cell, which is
also often referred to as crawling. To understand how a cell is able to crawl
to move itself we will in particular take the example of the lamelipodium.
Lamelipodia is a characteristic structure of cells moving on a 2D substrate. By
its nature, motion using lamelipodia in one of the easiest to study using
microscopy which might explain why it is one of the best know process on cell
displacement. Non the less, it does not diminish its importance in tissues
behavior as all epithelial cell can be considered as moving on a 2D substrate.
Beyond lamelipodia, structure that are responsible for cell motion are
filopodia and pseudopodia. They mainly differs from lamelipodia by their shape
and the organisation of the actin structure inside.
Lamelipodia-based motion can move a cell up to a few micrometers per minute.

The action necessary to move in an amoeboid way can be decomposed in three
steps. First the cell need to grow a protrusion. Growing this protrusion is
often governed by actin polymerisation just underneath the plasma membrane. The
lamelipodia is such a protrusion which is constituted by a 2D actin network
that polymerize at the leading edge of the cell. Second the cell's protrusion
need to attach to the surface. This is done through trans membrane proteins
that are bound to the actin cortex on the inside of the cell. The actin cortex
will act as a scaffold to transmit the force across the cellular to these
anchor point. Last part is traction in which the rest of the cell is pulled
toward the attached protrusion. The traction force is mediated through the
cytoskeleton and actin cortex while the contraction force themselves can origin
from actin network contraction and reorganisation due to myosin motors.

As we can see the cell cytoskeleton and the actin cortex in particular play a
fundamental role in the motion process of mesenchymal cells. While we can see
that wit the lamelipodia, the same conclusion can be drawn from pseudopodia and
filopodia. Indeed filopodia basically differ from lamelipodia by the fact that
they are unidimensional at the scale of the cell and are host of an actin
structure made of parallel  filaments and bundles. Pseudopod are the equivalent
of filopodia, except they are characteristic in motion in a 3D environment and
are constituted by an actin gel more than parallel filaments.  

Blebbing base Motility
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. 4

The second mode of motility which is known as mesenchymal is more
characteristic of 3D displacement of cells. In this mode, the cells will also
form protrusions but will not rely on the traction to move its body. This
motility rely on blebs, that are blister-like protrusion that happened on the
cell surface. A bleb form on the surface of cell when the membrane detach from
the actin cytoskeleton underneath it. The small protrusion formed with quickly
grows as it lacks the force supporting layer that the actin cortex provide and
fill with the cytosol. The actin cortex can rapidly reform on the bleb slowing
down its growth. In some cases, the reformation of the actin cortex in the bleb
and the rebuilding of the tension inside the bleb is enough to reverse the
bleb. Though, the content of the cell can also drain itself into the bleb as it
grows and while the main body of the cell contract and empties, thus moving the
cell from its old position to a new one in the direction of the initial growth
of the bleb.

The initial state of blebs as spherical protrusion almost only made of membrane
and filled with cytosol make them a perfect simple system to reconstitute and
model in vivo.


The actin cortex
================
.. 3

The actin cortex is a thin layer that can be found just underneath the plasma
membrane of a cell and which is attached to it. The properties of the actin
cortex made it a key component is diverse processes. Its capacity to to resit
to, and transmit force made it indispensable to the locomotion of majority of
cell by allowing the retraction of the rear of migrating cell. It structure is
also essential for the cellular division as contractility is necessary to
generate cortical tension and achieve the separation of the two daughter cells.


The actin cortex  cortex measure from 50nm to around 1Âµm thickness and is
constituted of actin filament that can be parallel or orthogonal to the
membrane as one can see using electron microscopy on cells :cite:`Morone2006b`. 

.. todo::
       Should extract image of actin cortex from Morone2006 probably.



Organelle Positioning (actin cloud) 
====================================
.. 3

We have previously seen that actin play a major role in cell motility and
division. By opposition to the actin cortex is thin and dense network just
under the membrane, we will interest here in different kind of structure formed
by actin that have an as important role in the cells life cycle.

In the same way that cell need to displace, or that component need to be
transported between part of the cell, the positioning of organelles in cells is
crucial for development. The cell nucleus, essential to the cell replication as
it contains most of the genetic material need to be protected. It has been
shown :cite:`Iwabuchi2010` that in plant cell, the nucleus is moved away from
high energy light that could damage its DNA with a mechanism that involve
actin. Wether the nucleus is actually sliding along actin bundles or anchored
to the filament while they are pull as not been addressed in for theses cells,
is has been shown that in fibroblast, nuclear positioning is directly coupled
to actin cable using TAN lines :cite:`Luxton2011`. Both of theses mechanism use
actin as a scaffold to transmit the forces generated by other process to the
targeted organelle. Molecular motors in the cases of plant cell, and retrograde
flow in the second one. It is a natural question to ask of whether or not,
actin can have such effect by itself ?

A beginning of answer to this question can be hinted by looking at drosophila
nurses cell. Indeed, during the phase where nurses cell expel their content
into the oocyte, the nucleus have to be positioned not to obstruct the process.
It was observed:cite:`Huelsmann2013` that the force exerted by polymerizing
filament seem to be enough to displace the nucleus. More especially, while the
polymerisation occurs at anchored points in the membrane, the actin filaments
grows, moving the pointed end toward the nucleus, eventually pushing it away.

.. todo::
    
    - speak about necessity of a soft actin cortex for spindle positioning in
      oocyte ( Chaigne Sykes, Campillo) 
    - :cite:`Azoury2011`  Symmetry Breaking in mouse Oocyte require transient F-Actin meshwork 
    - :cite:`Lenart2005` A contractile nuclear actin network drives chromosome congression in oocytes.


Nuclear positioning during meiosis
==================================


