.. role_of_actin

The Role Of Actin Cytoskeletton
*******************************


Cell Motility
=============

.. todo::
    
    - ameboide
    - mesenchymal

The actin cortex
================

The actin cortex is a thin layer that can be found just underneath the plasma
membrane of a cell and which is attached to it. The properties of the actin
cortex made it a key component is diverse processes. Its capacity to to resit
to, and transmit force made it indispensable to the locomotion of majority of
cell by allowing the retraction of the rear of migrating cell. It structure is
also essential for the cellular division as contractility is necessary to
generate cortical tension and achieve the separation of the two daughter cells.


The actin cortex  cortex measure from 50nm to around 1µm thickness and is
constituted of actin filament that can be parallel or orthogonal to the
membrane as one can see using electron microscopy on cells :cite:`Morone2006b`. 

.. todo::
       Should extract image of actin cortex from Morone2006 probably.



Organelle Positioning (actin cloud) 
====================================

We have previously seen that actin play a major role in cell motility and
division. By opposition to the actin cortex is thin and dense network just
under the membrane, we will interest here in different kind of structure formed
by actin that have an as important role in the cells life cycle.

In the same way that cell need to displace, or that component need to be
transported between part of the cell, the positioning of organelles in cells is
crucial for development. The cell nucleus, essential to the cell replication as
it contains most of the genetic material need to be protected. It has been
shown :cite:`Iwabuchi2010` that in plant cell, the nucleus is moved away from
high energy light that could damage its DNA with a mechanism that involve
actin. Wether the nucleus is actually sliding along actin bundles or anchored
to the filament while they are pull as not been addressed in for theses cells,
is has been shown that in fibroblast, nuclear positioning is directly coupled
to actin cable using TAN lines :cite:`Luxton2011`. Both of theses mechanism use
actin as a scaffold to transmit the forces generated by other process to the
targeted organelle. Molecular motors in the cases of plant cell, and retrograde
flow in the second one. It is a natural question to ask of whether or not,
actin can have such effect by itself ?

A beginning of answer to this question can be hinted by looking at drosophila
nurses cell. Indeed, during the phase where nurses cell expel their content
into the oocyte, the nucleus have to be positioned not to obstruct the process.
It was observed:cite:`Huelsmann2013` that the force exerted by polymerizing
filament seem to be enough to displace the nucleus. More especially, while the
polymerisation occurs at anchored points in the membrane, the actin filaments
grows, moving the pointed end toward the nucleus, eventually pushing it away.

.. todo::
    
    - speak about necessity of a soft actin cortex for spindle positioning in
      oocyte ( Chaigne Sykes, Campillo) 
    - :cite:`Azoury2011`  Symmetry Breaking in mouse Oocyte require transient F-Actin meshwork 
    - :cite:`Lenart2005` A contractile nuclear actin network drives chromosome congression in oocytes.


Nuclear positioning during meiosis
==================================


