============
Introduction
============

The bicycle is indeed a curious contraption. There are probably more bicycles
in the world that any other kind of vehicle. The bicycle has a notable history
and helped paved the way for the industrial revolution, the automobile, the
airplane and even some say the emancipation of women in the west. But it is
often an overlooked item in this day an age, especially in the United States of
America, where the automobile is the dominant form of transportation and the
bicycle is mostly considered a child's toy. But in other parts of the world,
the bicycle is can be viewed a a person's stepping stone to progress or the
most convenient way to get around. And what may be even more special about the
bicycle is that in its elegenat simplicity, it embodies the solutions to many
of the world's transporation problems, whether it be in the congested 12 lane
freeways of Los Angeles to the rural village deep in the heart of Africa.

In my life, I have become an ever strong proponent of the use of the bicycle as
an appropriate mode of transportation. It is in fact the most energy efficient
way for a human to travel [Wilson2004]_ and it has crept into all parts of my
life with much of my time being spent thinking about many different aspects of
bicycles and bicycling. But this disseration is concerened with how do we
actally balance on the blasted thing. Balancing, in general, may seem like a
trivial task because we can all do so without consciosly thinking about it, but
the fact that the best engineers in the world are still baffled by many of the
intricancies of balancing human-like robots supports the fact that it isn't
such a trivial thing. And to muddle it even more, humans can do advanced
balancing acts like tight rope walking where we do invoke our *very* active
control. Riding a bicycle falls somewhere inbetween normal balancing and these
more extreme acts. It effectibely disconnects us from the ground and forces us
to use somewhat differenct control implements to stay upright.

The Bicycle and Rider as a Dynamic System
=========================================

The bicycle is fundamentally a lightweight single track vehicle with two wheels
and a revolute joint between the frame and fork. This revolute joint is
necessary for balance. It is easy to show that locking the steering on a
bicycle almost completely removes its ability to balance or be balanced, and
certainly can't be guided in a desired direction, no matter how the rider moves
their body.
