=======
Preface
=======

The typical conversation with someone I've met over the past years as I've been
a graduate student inevitably comes to this: "So what do you do?" and my reply
is "I study how people balance on bicycles". This is a great conversation
starter as almost everyone recalls learning how to ride a bicycle. It's is
something we weren't born to do and we everyone almost always remembers the
feeling of learning the skill as it is a momentous occasion in most folks'
lives. Usually everyone thinks the research is cool and can identify with it,
but the next question (as is with most research), is "What application is that
good for?". As an engineer, we are trained to be application minded. It is
certainly what drove me to start down this path in the first place.

The roots of my interest in bicycle dynamics come from an earlier time but
didn't take hold until I attempted to model the bicycle in Mont Hubbard's
multi-body dynamics class. My first inquires about bicycle dynamics came from
my attempts to design a recumbent bicycle frame for my senior design project at
Old Dominion University. Recumbents are notorious for not handling well and we
were building one for the annual ASME Human Powered Vehicle challenge and it
needed to be suitable for novice riders to control. I found myself in the
design process where one needs to choose the wheel sizes, front end geometry
and location and seating position of the rider. As an engineer is taught to, I
went looking for technical guidelines to choose these parameters for out
bicycle design, but all I came back with were many conflict testaments from
various bicycle fabricators and Bicycling Science 2nd Ed which gave a synopsis
of Jones', [Jones1970]_, conclusions from famous study on the stability of
bicycles. I studied this in detail and designed my bicycle geometry to be
exactly what was specified as good handling by Jones.[#tubes]_ The bicycle was
rideable (after lots of practice), but this was probably the first time I
realized as a young engineer that there wasn't a formula for everything.

This dissertation will hopefully document the majority of work I've done at UC
Davis and TU Delft since Fall 2005 with respect my dissertation topic.

Reproducibility
===============

My intention is provide enough information in the form of data, computer code,
and writing, that others will have a relatively easy time reproducing my work.
A cornerstone of science is that every result presented should be
theoretically reproducible. The ability of research to be reproducible is
certainly a function of what type of research it is, but fortunately my
research is such that reproducibility can mostly be accomplished if I provide
enough information.

Dissertation website
====================

I've decided to publish my dissertation publicly on the internet from the day I
started writing it. The first reason for this is that I want to take full
advantage the web offers for conveying ideas and information whether it be a
video or interactive program. Paper based publication is a thing of the past
and is unbelievably limiting form of sharing, especially for science. Secondly,
I want the process of writing my dissertation to be in the open with the
ability for anyone to offer comments, suggestions and edits. Dissertations are
historically considered to be the work of a single individual, but that is
never true. All the work we do is built on the works others have already done
and rarely does anyone produce their work without the help of others. I believe
that we should strive to move away from the idea that some work is only of one
person and embrace the fact that we need help from many many people to complete
something like a dissertation for a doctoral degrees. I also want this work to be
the best it can, and if others are interested in helping me make it that way
then an interactive website is a platform that is capable of promoting that.

Plagiarism
==========

As a child, I was programmed to think that any form of plagiarism was evil: you
shouldn't copy anything. But, how would we ever make any progress if we didn't
copy and improve on what others have done in the past? The work presented here
is mostly based off of the work that I have done in the past several years, but
there are many other people's work that is wrapped up in the work. Their
writings and thoughts will inevitably be present in this text. I do not claim
these as my own, but they will be required to tell the story of the research. I
will do my best to acknowledge anyone's work in this thesis, but there will
surely be some that I have forgotten. Please let me know if that is so, and I
will remedy it.

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#tubes] It wasn't till after welding the bicycle frame together did I
            realize that I'd cut a tube too long and the geometry was very
            different than I'd planned.
